`8.3.30 (2025-12-12) <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/releases/tag/8.3.30>`_
================================================================================================

Overview of merged pull requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`BUGFIX: Hotfix media browser horizontal over-scroll <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/pull/5708>`_
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Resolves: https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/issues/5685 at a bare minimum effort ... no extra glory ... not going over start and getting 200DM in cash... nuthing 

**Upgrade instructions**


* Packages: ``Media.Browser``

`BUGFIX: Creating valid „more“ url in history module <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/pull/5703>`_
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With this change the uri to load more history entries is correctly generated again and all history entries can be browsed.

* Resolves: `#5702 <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/issues/5702>`_

* Packages: ``Neos``

`BUGFIX: Nodes show action does not handle `\JsonSerializable` objects and crashes if object is not StringAble <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/pull/5706>`_
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With https://github.com/neos/neos-ui/pull/3723 and https://github.com/neos/neos-ui/pull/3723 the ``NodePropertyConverterService`` returns ``\\JsonSerializable`` objects directly in the expectation that they are serialized directly. This is also true for the usages within the Neos Ui.

But this legacy endpoint here in Neos doesnt do it. And throws

"Object of class Sitegeist\\Archaeopteryx\\Link could not be converted to string"

on some occasions whenever the endoint is used. Funnely the Neos Ui really does not care about the node properties rendered here via fluid in html so we could also return "nudelsuppe" here. Its just important that it not crashes.

https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/blob/`1aeef6c02142b41e4626ea32434f06cd0f84e9bd <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/commit/1aeef6c02142b41e4626ea32434f06cd0f84e9bd>`_/Neos.Neos/Resources/Private/Templates/Service/Nodes/Show.html#L30-L35

In the future we should have this whole thing killed :D

**Upgrade instructions**


* Packages: ``.github`` ``Neos``

`TASK: Update pdf.js library to version v5.4.394 <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/pull/5687>`_
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Update pdf.js to current version v5.4.394 and replace old version 1.9.426.

I consider this as a security bugfix. Thats why it targets 8.3.

* Fixes: `#5684 <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/issues/5684>`_ 

* Packages: ``Neos`` ``Media.Browser``

`Detailed log <https://github.com/neos/neos-development-collection/compare/8.3.29...8.3.30>`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
